course/04 - Company Owner Manages Users.md, before:

Now that the administrator can add users to the company, we need to implement a feature where the owner can add users to the company himself.

---

## Soft Delete Users

First, let's add [`SoftDeletes`](https://laravel.com/docs/eloquent#soft-deleting) for the User Model if someone accidentally deletes a user.

```sh
php artisan make:migration "add soft deletes to users table"
```

**database/migrations/xxxx_add_soft_deletes_to_users_table.php**:
```php
public function up(): void
{
    Schema::table('users', function (Blueprint $table) {
        $table->softDeletes();
    });
}
```

**app/Models/User.php**:
```php
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\SoftDeletes;

class User extends Authenticatable
{
    use HasApiTokens, HasFactory, Notifiable;
    use SoftDeletes; // [tl! ++]

    // ...
}
```

Because of this added feature, the test `test_user_can_delete_their_account` from Laravel Breeze is now broken.

**tests/Feature/ProfileTest**:
```php
class ProfileTest extends TestCase
{
// ...

    public function test_user_can_delete_their_account(): void
    {
        $user = User::factory()->create();

        $response = $this
            ->actingAs($user)
            ->delete('/profile', [
                'password' => 'password',
            ]);

        $response
            ->assertSessionHasNoErrors()
            ->assertRedirect('/');

        $this->assertGuest();
        $this->assertNull($user->fresh()); // [tl! --]
        $this->assertSoftDeleted($user->fresh()); // [tl! ++]
    }
    
// ...
}
```

Great, now it's fixed!

```
> php artisan test --filter=test_user_can_delete_their_account

PASS  Tests\Feature\ProfileTest
✓ user can delete their account 0.13s  

Tests:    1 passed (5 assertions)
Duration: 0.15s
```

---

## CRUD Actions

Now, let's move on to the main feature. First, let's show the new item `Administrators` in the navigation, which will be visible only for users with the role of `Company Owner`. Again, for now, I will just add a simple `@if` to check for the `role_id`. Let's add this new menu item under the companies.

**resources/views/layouts/navigation.blade.php**:
```blade
// ...
<!-- Navigation Links -->
<div class="hidden space-x-8 sm:-my-px sm:ml-10 sm:flex">
    <x-nav-link :href="route('dashboard')" :active="request()->routeIs('dashboard')">
        {{ __('Dashboard') }}
    </x-nav-link>
    @if(auth()->user()->role_id === \App\Enums\Role::ADMINISTRATOR->value)
        <x-nav-link :href="route('companies.index')" :active="request()->routeIs('companies.index')">
            {{ __('Companies') }}
        </x-nav-link>
    @endif
    @if(auth()->user()->role_id === \App\Enums\Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value) {{-- [tl! add:start] --}}
        <x-nav-link :href="route('companies.users.index', auth()->user()->company_id)" :active="request()->routeIs('companies.users.*')">
            {{ __('Administrators') }}
        </x-nav-link>
    @endif {{-- [tl! add:end] --}}
</div>
// ...
```


![administrators for a company navigation](images/administrators-for-a-company-navigation.png)

Now that we have the navigation link let's implement the backend part. So, first, let's create a policy and register it in the `AuthServiceProvider`.

```sh
php artisan make:policy CompanyUserPolicy --model=Company
```

**app/Providers/AuthServiceProvider.php**:
```php
use App\Models\Company;
use App\Policies\CompanyUserPolicy;

class AuthServiceProvider extends ServiceProvider
{
    protected $policies = [
        Company::class => CompanyUserPolicy::class,
    ];

    // ...
}
```

In the policy itself, I immediately thought that an `administrator` would be able to do everything. So, I remembered the `before` [Policy Filter](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#authorizing-actions-using-policies) method. In this method, we will just return `true` if the user has the role of `administrator`.

I thought about what check needs to be done for other CRUD methods. And it's very simple: we just need to check that role is the `Company Owner` and that the user's company is where he tries to do the action.

So, the whole policy code is below.

**app/Policies/CompanyUserPolicy.php**:
```php
use App\Enums\Role;
use App\Models\User;
use App\Models\Company;

class CompanyUserPolicy
{
    public function before(User $user): bool|null
    {
        if ($user->role_id === Role::ADMINISTRATOR->value) {
            return true;
        }

        return null;
    }

    public function viewAny(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function create(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function update(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function delete(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }
}
```

Next, in the `CompanyUserController`, we need to do the `authorize` check for each CRUD action. There are a couple of ways to do that, but I will use the [`authorize`](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#via-controller-helpers) method.

> For other authorizing ways, check the [official documentation](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#authorizing-actions-using-policies).

**app/Http/Controllers/CompanyUserController.php**:
```php
class CompanyUserController extends Controller
{
    public function index(Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('viewAny', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function create(Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('create', $company);

        // ...
    }

    public function store(StoreUserRequest $request, Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('create', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function edit(Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('update', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function update(UpdateUserRequest $request, Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('update', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function destroy(Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('delete', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }
}
```

Great! Now users with the `Company Owner` role can create new users for their company and cannot do any CRUD actions for other companies.

---

## Tests

So now we made some changes to the `CompanyUserController` and added additional authorization. First, let's check if we didn't break anything for the users with the `administrator` role.

```
> php artisan test --filter=CompanyUserTest                                                                                                      

PASS  Tests\Feature\CompanyUserTest
✓ admin can access company users page 0.09s  
✓ admin can create user for a company 0.02s  
✓ admin can edit user for a company 0.01s  
✓ admin can delete user for a company 0.01s  

Tests:    4 passed (10 assertions)
Duration: 0.16s
```

Great! All tests are green.

Now let's add more tests to the `CompanyUserTest`. We will check if the user with the `Company Owner` role can do CRUD actions for his company and cannot do any for other companies.

Before adding the tests, we need to add another [Factory State](https://laravel.com/docs/eloquent-factories#factory-states) for the `Company Owner` role.

**database/factories/UserFactory.php**:
```php
class UserFactory extends Factory
{
    // ...

    public function companyOwner(): static
    {
        return $this->state(fn (array $attributes) => [
            'role_id' => Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value,
        ]);
    }
}
```

And the tests themself.

**tests/Feature/CompanyUserTest.php**:
```php
class CompanyUserTest extends TestCase
{
    // ...

    public function test_company_owner_can_view_his_companies_users()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);
        $secondUser = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->get(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $response->assertOk()
            ->assertSeeText($secondUser->name);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_view_other_companies_users()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->get(route('companies.users.index', $company2->id));

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_create_user_to_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->post(route('companies.users.store', $company->id), [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'password' => 'password',
        ]);

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseHas('users', [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'company_id' => $company->id,
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_create_user_to_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->post(route('companies.users.store', $company2->id), [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'password' => 'password',
        ]);

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_edit_user_for_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->put(route('companies.users.update', [$company->id, $user->id]), [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseHas('users', [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
            'company_id' => $company->id,
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_edit_user_for_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->put(route('companies.users.update', [$company2->id, $user->id]), [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_delete_user_for_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->delete(route('companies.users.update', [$company->id, $user->id]));

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseMissing('users', [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_delete_user_for_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->delete(route('companies.users.update', [$company2->id, $user->id]));

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }
}
```

![](images/company-owner-manages-users-tests.png)

Good. All the tests passed!

Commit message:

Edited lesson 3 and 4 of the course

course/04 - Company Owner Manages Users.md, after:

Now that the administrator can add users to the company, we need to implement a feature where the **company owners** can add users to the company themselves.

---

## Soft Delete Users

First, let's add [`SoftDeletes`](https://laravel.com/docs/eloquent#soft-deleting) for the User Model if someone accidentally deletes a user. I personally do that for almost all DB tables in Laravel, my experience showed that such "just in case" paid off in case of emergencies too often.

```sh
php artisan make:migration "add soft deletes to users table"
```

**database/migrations/xxxx_add_soft_deletes_to_users_table.php**:
```php
public function up(): void
{
    Schema::table('users', function (Blueprint $table) {
        $table->softDeletes();
    });
}
```

**app/Models/User.php**:
```php
use Illuminate\Database\Eloquent\SoftDeletes;

class User extends Authenticatable
{
    use HasApiTokens, HasFactory, Notifiable;
    use SoftDeletes; // [tl! ++]

    // ...
}
```

Because of this added feature, the test `test_user_can_delete_their_account` from Laravel Breeze is now broken. Let's fix it.

**tests/Feature/ProfileTest**:
```php
class ProfileTest extends TestCase
{
    public function test_user_can_delete_their_account(): void
    {
        $user = User::factory()->create();

        $response = $this
            ->actingAs($user)
            ->delete('/profile', [
                'password' => 'password',
            ]);

        $response
            ->assertSessionHasNoErrors()
            ->assertRedirect('/');

        $this->assertGuest();
        $this->assertNull($user->fresh()); // [tl! --]
        $this->assertSoftDeleted($user->fresh()); // [tl! ++]
    }
}
```

Great, now it's fixed!

```
> php artisan test --filter=test_user_can_delete_their_account

PASS  Tests\Feature\ProfileTest
✓ user can delete their account 0.13s  

Tests:    1 passed (5 assertions)
Duration: 0.15s
```

---

## CRUD Actions

Now, let's move on to the main feature. First, let's show the new item `Administrators` in the navigation, which will be visible only for users with the role of `Company Owner`.

**Notice**: I know it sounds a bit confusing: internally we call those people "Company Owners" role but for them visually a better understandable word is "Administrators".

Let's add this new menu item after the menu "Companies". For permission check, I will just add a simple `@if` to check for the `role_id`.

**resources/views/layouts/navigation.blade.php**:
```blade
// ...
<!-- Navigation Links -->
<div class="hidden space-x-8 sm:-my-px sm:ml-10 sm:flex">
    <x-nav-link :href="route('dashboard')" :active="request()->routeIs('dashboard')">
        {{ __('Dashboard') }}
    </x-nav-link>
    @if(auth()->user()->role_id === \App\Enums\Role::ADMINISTRATOR->value)
        <x-nav-link :href="route('companies.index')" :active="request()->routeIs('companies.index')">
            {{ __('Companies') }}
        </x-nav-link>
    @endif
    @if(auth()->user()->role_id === \App\Enums\Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value) {{-- [tl! add:start] --}}
        <x-nav-link :href="route('companies.users.index', auth()->user()->company_id)" :active="request()->routeIs('companies.users.*')">
            {{ __('Administrators') }}
        </x-nav-link>
    @endif {{-- [tl! add:end] --}}
</div>
// ...
```

![administrators for a company navigation](images/administrators-for-a-company-navigation.png)

Now that we have the navigation link, let's implement the backend part. 

We do have the CRUD Controller from the last lesson, but now we need to work on the permissions to "open up" that CRUD to another role. 

So, first, let's create a **Policy** and register it in the `AuthServiceProvider`.

```sh
php artisan make:policy CompanyUserPolicy --model=Company
```

**app/Providers/AuthServiceProvider.php**:
```php
use App\Models\Company;
use App\Policies\CompanyUserPolicy;

class AuthServiceProvider extends ServiceProvider
{
    protected $policies = [
        Company::class => CompanyUserPolicy::class,
    ];

    // ...
}
```

The Policy class will contain methods to check various permissions: 

- viewAny
- create
- update
- delete

And we will allow those actions based on user's role `Company Owner` and their company ID.

But for the `administrator` role, we need to just allow **everything**. So, I remembered the `before` [Policy Filter](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#authorizing-actions-using-policies) method. In this method, we will just return `true` if the user has the role of `administrator`.

So, the whole policy code is below.

**app/Policies/CompanyUserPolicy.php**:
```php
use App\Enums\Role;
use App\Models\User;
use App\Models\Company;

class CompanyUserPolicy
{
    public function before(User $user): bool|null
    {
        if ($user->role_id === Role::ADMINISTRATOR->value) {
            return true;
        }

        return null;
    }

    public function viewAny(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function create(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function update(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }

    public function delete(User $user, Company $company): bool
    {
        return $user->role_id === Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value && $user->company_id === $company->id;
    }
}
```

Next, in the `CompanyUserController`, we need to do the `authorize` check for each CRUD action. There are a couple of ways to do that, but I will use the [`authorize`](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#via-controller-helpers) method.

> For other authorizing ways, check the [official documentation](https://laravel.com/docs/authorization#authorizing-actions-using-policies).

**app/Http/Controllers/CompanyUserController.php**:
```php
class CompanyUserController extends Controller
{
    public function index(Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('viewAny', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function create(Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('create', $company);

        // ...
    }

    public function store(StoreUserRequest $request, Company $company)
    {
        $this->authorize('create', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function edit(Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('update', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function update(UpdateUserRequest $request, Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('update', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }

    public function destroy(Company $company, User $user)
    {
        $this->authorize('delete', $company); // [tl! ++]

        // ...
    }
}
```

Great! Now users with the `Company Owner` role can create new users for their company and cannot do any CRUD actions for other companies.

---

## Tests

So now we made some changes to the `CompanyUserController` and added additional authorization. First, let's check if we didn't break anything for the users with the `administrator` role.

```
> php artisan test --filter=CompanyUserTest                                                                                                      

PASS  Tests\Feature\CompanyUserTest
✓ admin can access company users page 0.09s  
✓ admin can create user for a company 0.02s  
✓ admin can edit user for a company 0.01s  
✓ admin can delete user for a company 0.01s  

Tests:    4 passed (10 assertions)
Duration: 0.16s
```

Great! All tests are green.

Now let's add more tests to the `CompanyUserTest`. We will check if the user with the `Company Owner` role can do CRUD actions for his company and cannot do any for other companies.

Before adding the tests, we need to add another [Factory State](https://laravel.com/docs/eloquent-factories#factory-states) for the `Company Owner` role.

**database/factories/UserFactory.php**:
```php
class UserFactory extends Factory
{
    // ...

    public function companyOwner(): static
    {
        return $this->state(fn (array $attributes) => [
            'role_id' => Role::COMPANY_OWNER->value,
        ]);
    }
}
```

And the tests themselves.

**tests/Feature/CompanyUserTest.php**:
```php
class CompanyUserTest extends TestCase
{
    // ...

    public function test_company_owner_can_view_his_companies_users()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);
        $secondUser = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->get(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $response->assertOk()
            ->assertSeeText($secondUser->name);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_view_other_companies_users()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->get(route('companies.users.index', $company2->id));

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_create_user_to_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->post(route('companies.users.store', $company->id), [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'password' => 'password',
        ]);

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseHas('users', [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'company_id' => $company->id,
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_create_user_to_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->post(route('companies.users.store', $company2->id), [
            'name' => 'test user',
            'email' => 'test@test.com',
            'password' => 'password',
        ]);

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_edit_user_for_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->put(route('companies.users.update', [$company->id, $user->id]), [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseHas('users', [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
            'company_id' => $company->id,
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_edit_user_for_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->put(route('companies.users.update', [$company2->id, $user->id]), [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }

    public function test_company_owner_can_delete_user_for_his_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->delete(route('companies.users.update', [$company->id, $user->id]));

        $response->assertRedirect(route('companies.users.index', $company->id));

        $this->assertDatabaseMissing('users', [
            'name' => 'updated user',
            'email' => 'test@update.com',
        ]);
    }

    public function test_company_owner_cannot_delete_user_for_other_company()
    {
        $company = Company::factory()->create();
        $company2 = Company::factory()->create();
        $user = User::factory()->companyOwner()->create(['company_id' => $company->id]);

        $response = $this->actingAs($user)->delete(route('companies.users.update', [$company2->id, $user->id]));

        $response->assertForbidden();
    }
}
```

![](images/company-owner-manages-users-tests.png)

Good. All the tests passed!
